DNA Methylation Deep Review Section # 2 of 3 - Inference, Imputation, and Prediction (#954)
greenelab/deep-review: content/04.study.md

Many previously untestable hypotheses can now be interrogated as deep learning enables analysis of increasing amounts of data generated by new technologies.
For example, the effects of cellular heterogeneity on basic biology and disease etiology can now be explored by single-cell RNA-seq and high-throughput fluorescence-based imaging, techniques we discuss below that will benefit immensely from deep learning approaches.

### DNA Methylation

#### Inference, Imputation, and Prediction

Deep learning approaches are beginning to help address some of the current limitations of feature-by-feature analysis approaches to DNA methylation data, and may help uncover additional important features necessary to understand the biological underpinnings behind different pathological states.

> One of the more popular applications is the prediction of the degree of methylation at CpG sites neighboring measured sites.

Reviewer: Does neighboring mean immediately adjacent or in the region? How big are the windows (in rough terms)?

Author: It depends, I think some methods like DeepCpG predict methylation in sites of local windows, integrating local information from sequence features at distances that could be well over 1kb away from the site. Methods like DAPL could potentially be integrating information that could be more long range to impute missingness, there's no threshold on window size like DeepCpG because it's a fully connected denoising autoencoder. I think it can be an assumption that sites that are nearby could be more useful. 

The short answer is within a region of a few kb using methods like DeepCpG.

> One of the more popular applications is the prediction of the degree of methylation at CpG sites neighboring measured sites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the more popular applications is imputing the degree of methylation at CpG sites that are within a few thousand base pairs of measured sites.
```
Is this appropriate? I think it would be helpful to include some idea of what range the methods are trying to predict. Feel free to re-word.

Author: I think this may be appropriate enough. For the AE methods, it would be appropriate to add that either within a few thousand sites (one sample) or informed by similar samples.

DeepSignal employs a convolutional neural network to construct features from raw electrical Nanopore signals from sites near a methylated base, and concatenates uses a bi-directional recurrent neural network on DNA sequences of the aligned signals to detect methylation [@tag:Ni2018].
DeepCpG applies a similar method using scBS-Seq, DNA sequence and Bidirectional GRUs [@tag:Angermueller2017] and methods like DAPL and DeepMethyl incorporate sequence and topological structure [@tag:Qiu2018] [@tag:Khwaja2017] [@tag:Wang2016_methyl] [@tag:Fu2019].
In addition to this, Gene expression has been used to infer and impute methylation states [@tag:Peng2019] [@tag:Levy-Jurgenson2018], methylation of genes predicted from promoter methylation [@tag:Pan2018], and convolutional models have been able to predict methylation status from images [@tag:Momeni2018][@tag:Korfiatis2017].

> While these examples of methylation imputation and inference methods have value it is imperative to recognize limitations of imputing cytosine modifications.

Reviewer: What is the current state of the art performance for imputation, and is it sufficient for downstream analyses (in your view) or is getting to "useful for many downstream analyses" still a work in progress?

Author: I normally just use MICE, K-NN and even Mean imputation, and personally have not tried deep learning imputation approaches, though I am open to developing and implementing new methodologies. I think many of these methods are more geared towards BS-Seq, which can make it harder to adopt for users of 450K and EPIC arrays. Though its conceivable that some of these methods could speed up the analysis, incorporating other modalities may make them more accurate, but coming across this data could still be a challenge. I think making them useful, easy-to-use, and tractable may still be a challenge, but standardized and modular workflows that incorporate these methods may make them more easily adoptable and mainstream.

Reviewer: Can you add maybe one or two sentences at the very end of this paragraph around how these methods compare to what's used in practice and whether or not they are at the stage yet where they can replace current methods? From my read of what you wrote, the answer is no because there are still some bespoke processes to get them working on new data (which is not true of other methods). However, you can see a path to get there. Is that right?

> Not only does imputing DNA methylation share similar limitations with  genotype imputation, but there is additional complexity in correlation of DNA methylation that can depend on cell type and other variables related with DNA methylation that can vary by sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imputing DNA methylation has complexities above and beyond genotype imputation: correlation of DNA methylation marks can depend on cell types and other factors that can vary by sample.
```

Reviewer: I thought it was important to make clear that this is pretty different.

> As the abundance of available tissue types and cell types with whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (and oxidative bisulfite sequencing), grows, the accuracy of imputation methods for DNA methylation is expected to increase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the number of tissue types and cell types with whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (and oxidative bisulfite sequencing) grows, the accuracy of DNA methylation imputation is expected to increase.
```

Reviewer: I made this change to emphasize that it seems what you're saying is that many of the current limitations are available data in addition to methods.

Once DNA methylation is measured, deep learning approaches can also be used to perform classification and regression tasks.
For instance, one group employed a Deep Neural Network (DNN) to predict triglyceride concentrations pre- and post-treatment from approximately 450K features (differential DNAm levels) from the Illumina 450K microarray, and used the Dropout technique to generalize the model [@tag:Islam2018] [@tag:Darst2018]. 
Another study transformed methylation profiles of about ten thousand TCGA samples to perform classification tasks to differentiate 32 different cancer types using the concatenation of various Convolutional Neural Network Maps and learn important patterns of differentially methylated regions that were used to make the classifications [@tag:Chatterjee2018].

> Finally, the prediction of cancer subtypes using DNAm was proposed based on a deep autoencoder. The system exploited content retrieval mechanisms to additionally understand the cancer cell type differentiation of the predicted cancer types [@tag:Khwaja2018] based on methylation of CpG islands.

Reviewer: Can you synthesize this a little bit? How did performance relate to other methods? Was there anything unique/particularly interesting about what was found?

Author: Sure, I'll add a new commit soon. Thanks for all of these edits and questions @cgreene . I'd also like to find a place to add https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/692665v1 , though it may be more appropriate in the embedding section (especially with mention of hyperparameter optimization). I'll add it here for now and see if we can move it around soon.

Author: Let me know if you'd like me to incorporate the above discussions into the text.

Author: Ok I committed some more text, take a look!

I think the final paragraph could still use some work, though I synthesized some sections.
